# Lithium Hopper Optimizations
This document is outdated and needs to be updated.
## Assumptions made about other inventories

(likely incomplete)
Inventories that implement restrictions for hopper item insertion do not depend on the size of the inserted stack.
Hoppers always transfer a single item, inventories do not reject a stack if they are able to receive a single item from
the stack (the receiving inventory slot is not filled to its limit and the item type is correct). This allows lithium to
avoid creating a copy of the transferred item stack when the transfer is going to fail.

## Inventory Stack List

LithiumStackList replaces the inventory stack lists. It keeps an inventory content modification counter and caches the
signal strength until the inventory content is modified.

## Lithium Inventory

LithiumInventory is any inventory that can have its stack list replaced with LithiumStackList. Making any inventory a
LithiumInventory just requires implementing the getters and setter of the stack list. This is done in the
InventoryAccessors class. An inventory implementing LithiumInventory allows hoppers to use the LithiumStackList's
additional data for some optimizations.

## Inventory Caching

Hoppers try to cache the inventory they are interacting with. If there is a cached inventory it can be used directly
without querying the world again. This is possible for BlockEntities, Composters and no block inventory presence. The
cache can be validated by checking whether the BlockEntity has not been removed from the world. Composters and no block
inventory presence will be invalidated when the hopper receives a block update from the corresponding direction. A
workaround for the update suppressing behavior when placing a hopper in a powered position
(cf. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QVOONJ1OY44 ) is included (cf. HopperBlockMixin). Entity inventories (storage
minecarts) are not cached, as they are randomly chosen every tick, may move or be destroyed at any time without notice
to the hopper.

## Modification Counter Shortcuts and Comparator Updates

Hoppers keep track of the last inventory they interacted with, and its modification count, even if the inventory is an
entity which must not be cached. This data can still be used for shortcutting the item transfer, given the hopper
interacts with the same inventory again. If both the hopper the inventory the hopper interacts with were not modified
since the last failed transfer attempt, it is known that the current attempt will fail as well. Therefore, the whole
transfer logic can be skipped, however, the side effects (comparator updates) of the failed transfer have to be
mimicked. Hoppers use the inventory modification counters to determine whether the transfer attempt can be skipped. The
comparator side effects (ComparatorUpdatePattern) are computed in HopperHelper and cached in the LithiumStackList. The
side effect cache is invalidated when the inventory is modified. The ComparatorUpdatePattern is only guaranteed to be
calculated like vanilla if mods do not add item types with a non-power-of-two maximum stack size.

The inventory modification counters are updated in LithiumStackList and ItemStackMixin. ItemStacks keep a reference to
the LithiumStackList they are in, and they notify the LithiumStackList when their stack size is manipulated. ItemStacks
can only be in one inventory at a time.

## Entity Interaction Shortcuts

The entity tracker engine makes each entity section (16x16x16 blocks) keep track on the last tick time an Entity of
class Inventory or ItemEntity have moved, appeared or disappeared inside them. Hoppers use the modification tick time to
determine whether any ItemEntity may have entered the pickup area after the last failed item pickup attempt. If the
hopper inventory did not change after the last failed item pickup attempt and no ItemEntities moved, the item pickup
attempt can be skipped, as it is guaranteed to fail like the previous attempt. Similarly, if there was no Inventory
Entity present last time, and no Inventory Entities have moved or appeared, the hopper does not need to search for
Inventory Entities.

# Comparator Caching

Block entities lazily initialize whether there is any comparator near them. Placing a comparator updates the value for
nearby block entities. Breaking a comparator does not reset it until the block entity is reloaded.

## Further Development

If any bugs show up, they will need to be fixed.

## How Lithium hoppers work different from vanilla

- Lithium Optimized Inventories:
    - Any vanilla inventory vanilla hoppers can interact with (Composters excluded!)
    - Custom Stack list (LithiumStackList):
      Replaces the vanilla stack list when a hopper accesses the inventory. It stores additional data:
        - Cached signal strength (int)
            - Stored when signal strength is calculated
            - Deleted when inventory content is changed
        - Cached Comparator Update Pattern (Enum)
            - Possible values: NO_UPDATE, UPDATE, DECR_UPDATE_INCR_UPDATE, UPDATE_DECR_UPDATE_INCR_UPDATE
            - Stored when accessed and not stored
                - accessed when failed transfer attempt is skipped due to unchanged inventories
            - Deleted when inventory content is changed
        - Signal Strength Override (boolean)
            - Sets the inventory signal strength to 0 when set
                - Only used to execute certain Comparator Update Patterns
        - Inventory Modificiation Count (long)
            - Increased when inventory content is changed
        - Number of occupied slots (int)
            - Updated when inventory content is changed (only checking the changed slot)
        - Number of full slots (int)
            - Updated when inventory content is changed (only checking the changed slot)
        - Parent Stack list
            - Only used when stack lists is a double chest half
            - Set when double stack list is created when double inventory is accessed by a hopper

- Lithium Sectioned Entity Movement Trackers:
    - Certain classes of Entities are configured to be tracked: Inventory and ItemEntity
    - Entity Sections store the timestamp of the last change for each tracked class
    - Entities of tracked classes notify their entity section every time their position change or when they are added or
      removed from the world
        - Updates their classes timestamp of the entity section to the current time
    - Entity Sections store a set of movement trackers
        - When the section becomes accessible or inaccessible the movement trackers are notified
    - Movement trackers are a data structure used by hoppers.
        - Data stored:
            - Box of the observed sections
            - The observed world (dimension)
            - The tracked class (Inventory or ItemEntity)
            - List of observed entity sections
            - Mask whether the sections are accessible
            - Number of users of this tracker
            - List of the accessible observed entity sections' timestamp (for more direct access)
            - Largest known change timestamp
        - Functonality:
            - Check whether it is guaranteed that no change (entity movement, creation, removal) happened after a given
              timestamp (includes usage and update of largest known timestamp)
            - Collect all entities of the tracked class inside a given box from the accessible observed entity sections.
                - For item entities multiple hitbox checks are done to return the item entities in the same order as
                  vanilla. First an encompassing box is checked as most nearby item entities won't be in any part of the
                  hopper interaction area.
        - Deduplication:
            - When a new movement tracker is created, and an equal one already exists, the already existing one is used
              instead. The number of users of the tracker is increased.
            - When the user no longer uses the tracker, it has to un-register and the number of users will be decreased.
              When it reaches 0, it is removed from the sets of trackers and can be garbage collected.

- Lithium Hopper behavior:
    - Data:
        - Own inventory modification counter at last item collection attempt
        - Own inventory modification counter at last insert attempt
        - Own inventory modification counter at last extraction attempt
        - Current insertion cache state and current extraction cache state:
            - UNKNOWN: Not yet determined
            - BLOCK_STATE: Composter or similar
            - BLOCK_ENTITY: Block Entity inventory or double chest
            - REMOVAL_TRACKING_BLOCK_ENTITY: Block Entity inventory or double chest but with inventory tracking
            - NO_BLOCK_INVENTORY: Interact with entities
        - Current insertion / extraction inventory (only block inventories)
        - Current expected block entity removal count for each current insertion / extraction inventory (only
          BLOCK_ENTITY)
        - Current lithium insertion / extraction inventory (only lithium optimized inventories)
        - Last known stack list of each current lithium insertion / extraction inventory
        - Last known inventory modification count of each current lithium insertion / extraction inventory
            - Updated just before attempting to transfer items
            - Used to skip transfer attempts
            - Only used if the last known stack list is also the current stack list of the same inventory

        - Item entity movement tracker
            - Created when item entities are searched for the first time
            - Un-registered when the hopper is removed
        - Item pickup search space bounding boxes and encompassing box
        - Time of the last item collection attempt

        - Inventory entity movement tracker (one for extraction and insertion each)
            - Created before searching for extraction / insertion inventory entities for the first time
            - Un-registered when the hopper is removed
        - Extract / Insert inventory entity interaction search box
        - Time of last search with no extract / insert inventory inside search box
    - Behavior
        - Shortcut inventory emptiness and fullness checks by comparing the number of occupied or full slots to 0 or
          inventory size
        - UNKNOWN cache state:
            - get the block inventory like vanilla and initialize the cache
        - BLOCK_STATE:
            - use the cached inventory
        - BLOCK_ENTITY:
            - check the expected removal count of the block entity, invalidate the cache if it changed
            - use the cached inventory if not invalidated, otherwise UNKNOWN cache state
        - REMOVAL_TRACKING_BLOCK_ENTITY
            - use the cached inventory. Subscribe to the cached inventory for major changes (removed from world) and
              invalidate the cache when handling those events if necessary.
        - NO_BLOCK_INVENTORY:
            - skip interacting with block inventory
        - Hopper receives a block/observer update from top or hopper's face:
            - invalidate corresponding cache state to UNKNOWN if current state is BLOCK_STATE or NO_BLOCK_INVENTORY
        - Use the extract / insert inventory entity movement tracker to retrieve an inventory entity
            - Skip getting inventory entities if the search box was empty and the tracker guarantees that no inventory
              entity positions changed since the last search
            - Cache the selected inventory
        - If interacting with an optimized inventory, compare the inventory modification counters to the stored values
          to determine whether the transfer attempt is guaranteed to fail. If it is guaranteed to fail, skip the
          transfer attempt and execute its cached comparator update pattern (use no update pattern when inserting).
        - Transfer a single item from the source to the target inventory like vanilla. Avoid copying item stacks when
          possible.
        - Update stored modification counters after failed a transfer attempt
        - Use the item entity entity movement trackers to retrieve item entities to interact with
            - Skip getting item entities if the search box was empty and the tracker guarantees that no item entity
              positions changed since the last search
            - Skip getting item entities if the modification counter of the hopper is equal to the stored value, and the
              tracker guarantees that no item entity positions changed since the last search
            - Get item entities, update the stored modification counter, the search timestamp and whether the search box
              is empty.

        - Hopper decides to sleep at the end of it ticking if:
            - The hopper is not on cooldown
            - The hopper inventory wasn't modified during the current hopper ticking
            - When querying inventory entities: No inventory entity was found in the interaction area and no inventory
              entity moved in the nearby chunk sections in the last and current tick
            - When interacting with inventory blocks: The inventory block is blockstate-based (composter) or supports
              inventory change tracking (double inventory + vanilla block entities).
            - When interacting with item entities: No item entity changed in the nearby chunk sections in the last and
              current tick
            - When extracting from a block entity: The hopper is not constantly sending comparator updates around the
              block entity that it is extracting from, or the comparator updates are not detectable, because there are
              no comparators within 2 blocks horizontal distance around the block entity (comparator rotation or block
              in between are not checked)
        - Hopper starts sleeping by subscribing to the relevant tracked inventories and subscribing to the relevant
          entity trackers. It also subscribes to itself for inventory changes.
        - When the hopper receives any event from the subscribed trackers, it will wake up and invalidate cached
          information if needed (e.g. inventory removal event -> invalidate cached data for this inventory)
        - When the hopper is set on cooldown it wakes up. However, to handle the 7gt/8gt cooldown case when being set to
          cooldown when receiving an item from another hopper, the hopper will receive a 7gt cooldown but only wake up
          in the next gametick.
        - More hopper sleeping capabilities in the general block entity sleeping code (Locked & Not on cooldown
          sleeping)